---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "information-technology"
version: "2019"
semester: 4
course_code: "mcn202"
course_title: "constitution-of-india"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AVA-NTHIKA14"
---

# MCN202: Constitution of India

## Course Outcomes

* Explain the background of the present Constitution of India and its features.  
* Utilize the fundamental rights and duties.  
* Understand the working of the Union executive, Parliament, and Judiciary.  
* Understand the working of the State executive, Legislature, and Judiciary.  
* Utilize the special provisions and statutory institutions.  
* Show national and patriotic spirit as responsible citizens of the country.  

## Course Objectives

* Explain the background of the present Constitution of India and its features.  
* Utilize the fundamental rights and duties.  
* Understand the working of the Union executive, Parliament, and Judiciary.  
* Understand the working of the State executive, Legislature, and Judiciary.  
* Utilize the special provisions and statutory institutions.  
* Show national and patriotic spirit as responsible citizens of the country.  

## Course Content

### Module - 1
Definition, historical background, features, preamble, territory, citizenship.  

### Module - 2
State, fundamental rights, directive principles, duties.  

### Module - 3
The machinery of the Union government.  

### Module - 4
Government machinery in the states.  

### Module - 5
The federal system, statutory institutions, miscellaneous provisions.  

## References

1. D. D. Basu, *Introduction to the Constitution of India*, Lexis Nexis, New Delhi, 24e, 2019.  
2. P. M. Bhakshi, *The Constitution of India*, Universal Law, 14e, 2017.  
3. Ministry of Law and Justice, *The Constitution of India*, Govt. of India, New Delhi, 2019.  
4. J. N. Pandey, *The Constitutional Law of India*, Central Law Agency, Allahabad, 51e, 2019.  
5. M. V. Pylee, *India’s Constitution*, S. Chand and Company, New Delhi, 16e, 2016.  
