---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "information-technology"
version: "2019"
semester: 4
course_code: "itt204"
course_title: "computer-organization"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AVA-NTHIKA14"
---

# ITT204: Computer Organization

## Course Outcomes

* Describe the basic organization of a computer and different instruction formats and addressing modes.  
* Analyze the basic operations and sequencing of control signals.  
* Represent the design of registers and the arithmetic logic unit (ALU).  
* Examine the concept of pipelining and various hazards associated with it.  
* Compare the performance of memory systems like cache and DRAM, and select appropriate interfacing standards for I/O devices.  

## Course Content

### Module - 1 
Basic structure and operation of computers – functional units – operational concepts – memory operations – addressing modes – instruction sequencing – basic I/O – subroutine calls – execution of a complete instruction – sequencing of control signals.  

### Module - 2 
Processor logic design and organization – register transfer logic – micro-operations – conditional control statements.  
Design of arithmetic unit, logic unit, ALU and shifter – accumulator.  

### Module - 3 
RISC – RISC instruction set – pipelining – hazards and mitigation.  

### Module - 4 
Memory – cache memory, mapping and performance improvement.  
DRAM organization. Memory controllers – scheduling.  

### Module - 5 
Peripheral subsystem – I/O organization – interrupts – DMA – bus arbitration – standard I/O interfaces.  

## References

1. Patterson D.A. and J. L. Hennessey, *Computer Organization and Design*, 5th Edition, Morgan Kauffmann Publishers, 2013.  
2. Hamacher C., Z. Vranesic and S. Zaky, *Computer Organization*, 5th Edition, McGraw Hill, 2011.  
3. M. Morris Mano, *Computer System Architecture*, 3rd Edition, Pearson Education, 2007.  
4. Bruce Jacob, David T. Wang, and Spencer Ng, *Memory Systems: Cache, DRAM, Disk*, 1st Edition, Morgan Kauffmann Publishers, 2007.  
5. William Stallings, *Computer Organization and Architecture: Designing for Performance*, 9th Edition, Pearson, 2013.  
6. M. J. Flynn, *Computer Architecture: Pipelined and Parallel Processor Design*, Narosa Publishing House, 2012.  
7. Rajaraman V. and T. Radhakrishnan, *Computer Organization and Architecture*, Prentice Hall, 2011.  
8. Messmer H. P., *The Indispensable PC Hardware Book*, 4th Edition, Addison-Wesley, 2001.  
