---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "information-technology"
version: "2019"
semester: "5"
course_code: "itt307"
course_title: "formal-languages-and-automata-theory"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AVA-NTHIKA14"
---

# ITT307: Formal Languages and Automata Theory

## Course Outcomes

* Understand the formal language hierarchy and its applications in computation.
* Construct automata for given regular languages and find their equivalent regular expressions.
* Design a context-free grammar for any given context-free language.
* Construct Turing machines and understand their capabilities.
* Understand the concept of undecidability.

## Course Content

### Module 1: Finite Automata 

* Family of formal languages, Finite automata, Type 3 formalism.
* Deterministic finite automata (DFA), Non-deterministic finite automata (NFA).
* NFA with epsilon transitions, Finite automata with output (Moore and Mealy machines).
* NFA to DFA conversions, Equivalence theorem between DFA and NFA, and minimization of DFA.

### Module 2: Regular Languages & Regular Expressions 

* Regular languages and Regular expressions.
* Myhill-Nerode theorem.
* Conversion of DFA's to Regular expressions by eliminating states, and vice-versa.
* Closure properties of Regular languages.
* Pumping lemma for Regular languages and its applications.

### Module 3: Type 2 formalism & Push Down Automata 

* Type 2 formalism: Context-free grammars (CFG) and languages.
* Parse trees, ambiguity in grammars.
* Pushdown automata (PDA): Acceptance by final state and empty stack.
* Equivalence of PDA's and CFG's, Deterministic pushdown automata (DPDA).
* Simplification of CFG, Pumping lemma for CFG's, Chomsky normal form, Greibach normal form.

### Module 4: Type 1 formalism 

* Closure properties of context-free languages.
* Decision properties of CFL's.
* Type 1 formalism: Context-sensitive grammar, Linear bounded automata.
* Type 0 formalism: Turing machine (TM), Recursively enumerable language (REL).
* Multitape TM, Non-deterministic TM, Properties of TM.

### Module 5: Undecidability and Universal Turing Machine 

* Halting problem of TM.
* Recursive languages, Unrestricted grammars.
* Universal Turing Machine (UTM), Tractability, Undecidable problems.
* Introduction to P and NP class problems.

## References

* Mishra, K. L. P., & Chandrasekaran, N. (2009). *Theory of Computer Science: Automata, Languages and Computation*. PHI Learning Private Limited.
* Hopcroft, J. E., Motwani, R., & Ullman, J. D. (2007). *Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and Computation*. Pearson Education.
* John, C. M. (2005). *Theory of Computation*. P.S.G College of Technology.
* Peter Linz, *An Introduction to Formal Languages and Automata*. Jones and Bartlett Publishers.
* Sipser, M. (2012). *Introduction to the Theory of Computation*. Cengage Learning.
